---
title:  "Umlaut in some Konkani plurals"
mathjax: true
layout: post
---
In Konkani, there are certain words whose plural forms are identical to their singular forms, differing only in vowel quality (with singular forms containing the **_'closed’_** vowel and plural forms containing the **_‘open’_** vowel). For example: **चोर** [t͡soɾ] ‘thief’ (m.sg) ↔ **चोर** [t͡sɔɾ] ‘thieves’ (m.pl) & **पोर** [poɾ] ‘child’ (n.sg) ↔ **पोर** [pɔɾ] ‘children’ (n.pl). How did this come about? A diachronic linguistic process called umlaut is to blame!

## What is Umlaut?
Umlaut is a type of assimilation, a linguistic process in which one sound changes to become more similar to a neighboring sound, either to ease pronunciation and/or to mark a semantic distinction. It often affects the nature of vowels in a language and is the reason English has forms like _foot–feet_ and _mouse–mice_ (we call this *Germanic Umlaut*).

## Diachronic Konkani Umlaut
The Konkani umlaut can be defined as follows: When a word contained either the _close-mid front_ [e] or _close-mid back_ [o]  followed by the _close back_ [u] in the next syllable, the preceding vowels remained unchanged. When the same vowels were followed by the _mid central_ [ə], they were lowered (or opened) to _open-mid_ [ɛ] and [ɔ] respectively. 

[This could indicate that the Konkani **_'schwa'_** is realized closer to the _open-mid vowel_ [ɜ].]

Once the umlaut process was established and vowel qualities shifted, the distinction between close-mid & open-mid vowels persisted regardless of whether [u] or [ə] were retained or lost.

Let us look at some examples to understand how this happened-

> &nbsp; 'Thief' (m.sg) <br>
> &nbsp; **चोरः → चोरो → चोरु → चोरु → चोर​** <br>
> &nbsp; ćōraḣ → ćōrō → coru → coru [t͡soɾu] → cor [t͡soɾ]
>
> &nbsp; 'Thief' (m.pl) <br>
> &nbsp; **चोराः → चोरा → चोर → चोर → चोर​** <br>
> &nbsp; ćōrāḣ → ćōrā → cora → córa [t͡sɔɾə] → cór [t͡sɔɾ]
>
> **[Note how the final vowels dropped, yet the vowel changes caused by umlaut persist.]**

[Stages are in the following order- **_Sanskrit (OIA) → Prakrit (Early MIA) → Apabhramsha (Late MIA) → Old-Konkani (Early NIA) → Konkani (NIA)_**]

Some other illustrative examples-

> &nbsp; 'husband' (m.sg) <br>
> &nbsp; **गोहः → गोहो → <sup>*</sup>घोउ → घोवु → घोव​​** <br>
> &nbsp; gōhaḣ → gōhō → <sup>*</sup>gʰou → gʰowu [gʱoʋu] → gʰow [gʱoʋ]
>
> &nbsp; 'husbands' (m.pl) <br>
> &nbsp; **गोहाः → गोहा → <sup>*</sup>घोअ → घोव → घोव​​** <br>
> &nbsp; gōhāḣ → gōhā → <sup>*</sup>gʰoa → gʰowa [gʱɔʋə] → gʰów [gʱɔʋ]


> &nbsp; 'brother-in-law' (m.sg) <br>
> &nbsp; **देवरः → देवरो → देअरु → देरु ​→ देर​** <br>
> &nbsp; dēvaraḣ → dēvarō → dearu → deru [d̻eɾu] → der [d̻eɾ]
>
> &nbsp; 'brothers-in-law' (m.pl) <br>
> &nbsp; **देवराः → देवरा → देअर → देर ​→ देर​** <br>
> &nbsp; dēvarāḣ → dēvarā → deara → déra [d̻ɛɾə] → dér [d̻ɛɾ]

> &nbsp; 'bear' (m.sg) <br>
> &nbsp; **<sup>*</sup>ऋक्षभल्लः → अच्छहल्लो → <sup>*</sup>आछअलु → आंस्वेलु → आंस्वेल​** <br>
> &nbsp; <sup>*</sup>r̩kṣabʰallaḣ → accʰahallō → <sup>*</sup>ācʰaalu → ā̃svelu [ä̃sʋelu] → ā̃svel [ä̃sʋel]
>
> &nbsp; 'bears' (m.pl) <br>
> &nbsp; **<sup>*</sup>ऋक्षभल्ला → अच्छहल्ला → <sup>*</sup>आछअल → आंस्वेल → आंस्वेल​** <br>
> &nbsp; <sup>*</sup>r̩kṣabʰallāḣ → accʰahallā → <sup>*</sup>ācʰaala → ā̃svéla [ä̃sʋɛlə] → ā̃svél [ä̃sʋɛl]
>
> _(Note- This word can be both masculine and neuter in Konkani)_
